We've all been there.
>> Siri, what's the name of the guy I had a
meeting with a couple of months ago at
Cafe Grenell?
>> You met Zach Winggate at Cafe Grenell.
>> Zach,
>> actor Bella Ramsay was bailed out by a
new version of Apple's Siri that was
meant to be available for all.
>> That feature still has not been
released. Originally supposed to come
out April, May of 2025, but now it's on
track for spring 2026. Apple took down
the ad and is facing a lawsuit over the
delay, but the disconnect exposed a
deeper issue. The company was losing
ground in the AI race.
>> They totally missed the boat. There was
indecision. There was lack of concern
that this could become a real thing.
>> This is a story about how hard it can be
to stay on top.
>> AI is something that wasn't in their
DNA.
>> Continued failure doesn't just hurt
Siri. It could threaten the iPhone's
dominance. The product line accounts for
more than half of Apple's revenue. So
missteps with what's become its most
noticeable missing features could be
devastating. AI has the ability to be a
make orb break moment for the company.
>> Apple has always been about good design
and accessibility.
>> Historically tends to wait um until the
technology has been improved by others.
then it will perfect it with its own
design and some of its own features and
then it will show it to people and it's
done that really well.
>> They knocked it out of the park with
multi-touch, the very core of the iPad.
They completely destroyed the
competition with their chips. But with
AI, they seem pretty far away from
really nailing the user experience and
the core tech. Nowhere is this more
apparent than with Siri, its character
in a play also starring Amazon's Alexa,
Google Assistant, and for a while there,
Microsoft's Cortana.
Poor Cortana. But here's the thing.
Apple didn't create Siri. It bought it.
>> Siri.
>> Back in 2011, the little known app gave
Apple a head start.
>> There was really nothing like it on the
market at the time.
>> What is the weather like today? Here's
the forecast for today.
>> People had been clamoring for some kind
of assistance software and it looked
like they had something very cutting
edge.
>> This race is far from over.
>> But its early lead didn't last. Within a
few years, those other players hit the
stage and they felt far more advanced.
>> They came out with a product 4 years
after Siri, but it quickly felt that
they were four years ahead of Siri.
Again, Apple threw some money at this
burgeoning AI problem. It poached one of
Google's top AI executives, John Gian
Andrea.
>> He quickly took over Siri and all the AI
initiatives. They brought everything
under one roof. And at that point,
people were very excited. Not only had
Apple taken a prize AI mind from its
biggest competitor at the time, but now
they felt like they can push all their
eggs into the AI basket. Jan Andrea's
team tried building a lighter, faster
Siri, but the project was ultimately
scrapped. Meanwhile, rivals were racing
ahead to develop large language models,
a foundation of generative AI for Apple.
Things were about to go from bad to,
"Hey Siri, what's a good word to finish
this sentence?"
>> It's called Chat GPT, the AI language
tool that is fascinating and frightening
people around the world.
>> It makes it almost like you're talking
to a person. CHPT changed really
everything for the world, the industry.
>> People were experimenting with similar
technology to what OpenAI was using, but
they hadn't put it together in quite the
same way and released it to consumers.
Other companies quickly realized, hey,
they've really caught on to something
here, something that people seem to
want.
>> Craig Federigi, Apple's software
engineering chief, he realized this is a
game changer. So him and other
executives sat down, met with open AI,
met with Enthropic to get a crash course
on LLMs and models. And so Federigi
immediately put the software engineering
group to work to develop a new
systemwide approach to AI.
>> It's showtime. Everything converged at
the Worldwide Developers Conference in
June 2024 where the company revealed
Apple Intelligence.
>> New personal intelligence system that
makes your most personal products even
more useful and delightful came out and
they showed all sorts of features that
seemed impressive. One was for
summarizing text.
>> Writing tools can rewrite, proofread,
and summarize text for you.
>> Summarizing notifications. They created
something called Genojis which basically
allows you to type in some text and
create any type of emoji based on the
text input. They also came up with
features like notification
prioritization.
>> And Apple called this AI for the rest of
us.
>> We are introducing the industry
milestone product Macintosh.
>> It was a call back to when they
introduced the Mac and they call that
the computer for the rest of us.
>> But Apple Intelligence was a dud out of
the gate.
>> They announced the iPhone 16. that
September
>> and they called it the first iPhone
built from the ground up for Apple
Intelligence. Truth was a little
different. Apple Intelligence didn't
launch until a month and a half after
the iPhone 16. But the biggest drawback
were the AI Siri features.
>> You know, the ones still missing from
the phone.
>> Apple intelligence is a huge black eye
for Apple. It's one of the biggest
issues the company has had in its
history.
>> Investors have taken note. AI
shortcomings are one reason why Apple's
share price has performed weakly this
year among the so-called magnificent
seven tech giants.
>> In a vacuum, the Siri features may not
seem super important. The reality is is
that we're moving into an AI device
ecosystem, a world of products driven by
machine learning and artificial
intelligence. Meta's working on this.
Google's working on this. Even Apple's
former design chief, Johnny IV, is
working on this.
Apple has several projects to rescue
Siri. A rebuilt engine, an AI web search
tool, a refreshed visual interface, and
a more conversational assistant.
>> They want to make Siri an always life
co-pilot that can get things done on
your behalf, and is something you can
trust.
>> The big element under discussion is how
much the company will rely on an outside
partner versus its foundation models
team.
What the heck is a foundation model, you
might ask? Good question. Essentially,
it's a grand jack-of alltrades software
that powers an AI tool. Open AAI's GPT5,
for instance, is the foundation model
you can throw anything at via the
product Chat GPT. It's the engine of the
family car. And for Apple, this
technology could form the core of a new,
more capable Siri. Apple has talked with
Google, with OpenAI, with Enthropic
about replacing their foundation models
with the underpinnings from those third
parties. If Apple's able to do that,
you're looking at a really potentially
great product. Marrying Apple's user
interface design with the hot core
technology that would go a long way for
consumers because consumers for the most
part don't really understand or care
quite frankly who made the AI technology
and Apple just wants to sell cool
products. What they're hitting up
against here is with generative AI, it's
so expensive and so timeconuming and
difficult to build this kind of thing
yourself.
Ironically, some of the company's
notable practices have hindered its own
progress.
First, spending. Despite having a lot of
cash on hand, Apple doesn't do it
lightly. In the AI world, you're
investing tens of billions of dollars a
quarter, depending on what your company
is, without even knowing if you're going
to get a payoff. Apple doesn't invest
large sums of money without knowing
there's going to be a gigantic payoff.
>> This chart reflects the trend. Amazon,
Google, Microsoft, and Meta are pouring
billions into chips and data centers to
power their AI models and support a
business model of providing AI services
to others. Apple's expenditures are far
less in part because it's only ever
focused on building for itself.
>> With Apple intelligence, powerful
intelligence goes hand in hand with
powerful privacy.
>> The company's stance on privacy also
creates limits. It's championed ondevice
AI, processing much of your data locally
to keep things private. But the iPhone's
processing power only allows for simple
features like summarizing an email. For
more advanced requests, Apple turns to
its own so-called private cloud comput
servers which use its own model and
chips or on occasion chat GPT.
>> Take a look at how many iPhones it sold,
3 billion. They could have had access to
so much search data, how people are
using their phones, what apps they're
using, but they really haven't used a
lot of that to do training.
>> That same caution extends to its product
development. When Apple wants to develop
a product, it does its research and it
sits down to build it and it knows
exactly what it's going to build and how
it's going to get there. AI is more of a
universe where you're figuring out
things as you go along.
>> In the past where you might release a
new product or do a software update once
a year, perhaps twice a year, this seems
to be like a constant churn and it's
really hard to keep up even if you are a
large company with a ton of money. On
top of this all, competitors are trying
to lure top talent in the field, much
like Apple did a few years back.
>> Meta and OpenAI are throwing large sums
of money at Apple's Foundation Models
engineers to get them to jump ship. In
one case, one leader of Apple's
Foundation Models team. Meta offered him
a pay package over several years worth
north of $200 million.
>> In tech, you might be paid a lot as an
engineer. Um, but that would tend to be
in like the hundreds of thousands of
dollars perhaps. This is just pushing
things into a whole new stratosphere.
>> Good morning. Welcome to Apple Park.
>> At the iPhone 17 launch event in
September, Apple had little to say about
AI.
>> Design has always been fundamental to
who we are and what we do.
>> But behind closed doors, Cook has
described the AI revolution as big or
bigger as the internet and smartphones.
and told staff, "Succeeding is quote
ours to grab."
Alongside a new Siri, the company is
developing a bunch of products to help
it catch up. We saw this for many
decades. Nokia was at the very top of
the phone industry. Apple came out with
a much better mousetrap. Blackberry was
at the top of the industry. Apple came
out with a better mousetrap. They are
going to be in danger of the next Apple
being created if they don't get their
act together soon with some serious
acquisitions, changes, and partnerships.
[Music]